标题: Judea Pearl -- The Foundations of Causal Inference  [The Book of WHY]
来源: whisper
========================================
Listen from me then I will pass you the floor to him. Are you ready? I'm ready. We'll do, we'll do. You do around two hours, I'll give him one hour and a half, this is the commitment, then we will open for questions for half an hour. And you, the floor is yours. Thank you, Elias. Thank you all for coming. I haven't been to Stanford for, I think, five years. So it's great for me to renew my acquaintance with the campus and with people who are interested in some aspects of AI in machine learning. But I'll talk to you about a new logic, something which it's hard to convince people that it's new. I call it causal inference, because everybody is doing causal inference. You turn the light switch and light it on. You know, I'd say you think about the effect of cigarettes or cancer, you think about everything we think about is cause and effect. So how can a person come here to Stanford and say, I am going to tell you something new? It takes a lot of chutzpah, you see, in English, or audacity in English. So I'll subject myself to this awkward situation whereby I'm going to claim that something is new about something which is in your heart already, reside there. Here is what I'm going to do. Now this is a light, good and advanced being. No, not yet. Advanced goes here. I think advanced works well. This one here. And this is the laser. Yeah, this is the laser. That's it. To process the thinking that goes into causal reasoning, we need a new logic. And I'll discuss why I call it a new logic. And after discussing, I can give you some examples of what I mean by causal question. And then I'm going to convince you that AI needs, I had a backboard, now I got it. It's very simple, just go back in time. Why AI needs a new engine to operationalize this new logic? The old engines, predicate calculus or probability theory, simply are insufficient to capture this new logic. And all the machinery that we build in computer science needs to be modified, if not revolutionized in discussion. Then I'm going to talk to you and show you the two fundamental laws, some people call it double helix, of causal inference. If you acquire them, acquire not enough. If you internalize them, then you can solve all causal questions that anyone can invent. You can derive everything that I've done in my life. And I think everything that is expected of a causal reasoning, a quick causal reason error. So it's nice to be able to condense it into two fundamental laws, everything else is just a few mathematics. Then I'm going to come to the main topic of the talk, which is going to be seven pillars of causal wisdom. I call them tools in the CACM paper because the reviewer didn't like the pillars, it's too philosophical. But tools, people understand what it is, they call it tools. These will be several, I sometimes call them victories. Namely things that we wanted to do and we couldn't do and now we can do, victories. From which AI and machine learning can learn something. Here it is, it's good to start 10,000 years ago. You feel comfortable because no one can prove you wrong. We make an observation that 10,000 years ago something special happened. Human beings were 1% of all vertebrate life on planet Earth. And then today the percentage, including chickens and goats, is in a neighborhood of 98%. That kind of dominion of the planet did not occur to any other species and as far as we know, it has no precedent in the evolutionary process. So something strange happened here and when we ask what happened, we computer scientists mean what computational facilities human acquired, they didn't possess before. There are many theories about it, but I found it most reasonable and plausible theory to be encapsulated in this particular secret. It is a figurine, it's ivory made figurine of a man with a lion head. It's stored today at the Museum of Ulm, that's in Germany. They told me a few blocks from the house where Einstein was born. And I think it's not just coincidence. It was found in a cave in southwest Germany and it is the first human made artifact which depicts objects that do not exist in the universe, that do not exist physically. There aren't any men with lion heads, no lions with human bodies. So apparently the artist of this sculpture had the great imagination of putting two things together that do not exist. And that started the whole revolution according to Sapiens, the book Sapiens by Harari. He explained how this particular ingredient in cognitive ability is responsible for the agricultural revolution, the industrial revolution, the scientific revolution, the cognitive revolution, everything that we are suffering from today. And indeed, how can we attribute so much revolutionary processes to such a simple figurine sculpture? The main thing is that to do that, the sculpture, the artist had to have a model of the world. He had to have any mind or hair of mind, probably was a male. And understanding, no understanding, it's a model of what human beings are like and what lions are like. And apparently he wanted to combine two features of the two species to signify perhaps a wish to be as brave as a lion. But the important thing is notice that there is an element of modularity here. When you take in your mind, if you imagine you take a human body and replace the head with a lion head, the rest of the body stays the same. So you have here a picture, a modular picture of the world which you can combine at will by your imagination before you do it physically. And that is a secret. That involves, that is a scene for planning. You can predict what's going to happen to the world without actually doing it. Just thinking in your mind. So the theory goes that the ingredient is responsible for the dominion of the homo sapiens on the planet. 70,000 years ago there was a movement of sapiens from Africa to Europe and to Asia. And they essentially wiped out the homo erectus in Asia and the Neanderthal men in Europe. Despite the fact that physically speaking, the other species were superior to the homo sapiens. So Harari attributes that ingredient, the ability to imagine and which led to the ability to organize, which led to the ability to plan. And all those together gave that superiority to homo sapiens at the time. And how does this account for organization? Well, if you have the ability to imagine, then you can create a market for promises. You can promise something to someone else and that somebody else can imagine that it will be realized. So all the tribe chiefs would promise his constituency dominion over the other village and they will follow it. The king would promise his subjects a victory over the next nation and his subjects will follow him, even send his sons and daughters to the palace to serve the king for the sake of the promise. One step further, the priest could promise you afterlife and look what happened. As Harari said, you could never convince a monkey to give you a banana by promising him a limitless banana after death in a monkey heaven. But you will go for it. So that's the power of promises and the imagination to believe that the promise will be realized. That creates larger societies. And when you have larger societies and they act coherently, they become powerful. Then you have wars and you have progress too. You have progress. So that's the story of the lion man and I would like to elaborate now on it and go back to our causal question, which could not be answered by a fair before the sapiens invented the imagination. So here are some typical causal questions that we would like to answer today. How effective is a given treatment in preventing a disease? For the medical profession, anybody here from the medical school? I hope we have some epidemiologists. And was it the new tax break that caused our sales to go up or our marketing campaign? That's a question that every marketing manager is asking him or her self. Next, what is annual health care cost attributed to obesity? It was in the past year in the New York Times. A big argument of whether obesity is responsible for health cause. If you can measure obesity, if it can be even obtained causal power. Because you cannot manipulate it. Next thing is to look at another question. Can hiring records prove an employer guilty of sex discrimination? Also, much in the news. And the next one is I'm about to quit my job, will I regret it? It's a personal decision making, but one individual already made a decision and is about asking him or her self, would I regret it? I just want to, for those of you who are in robotics, a robot can issue the same kind of questions. I'm about to meet another robot, will I regret it? Why did I yell out here those attributes or those adjectives and terms? Because those revealed to me, and I've already got an experience where I can read text and see where the causal entity is or the causal relation is. All those are causal relationships. And they cannot be articulated in the standard grammar of science. That's my claim here. I'm not talking about solving them. I'm not talking about coming up with a number of effective treatment. I'm talking about articulating the question, the research question, in a language that could be, which could be said to be scientific. We understand what it is. When epidemiologists talk about how effective things, they communicate with each other, even without number. They understand. But when you want to be scientific, then we have to convert it into some formal language because at some point you want to combine it with data. And you cannot combine English with data. That is the weakness of the English language. But you need to convert it to some mathematical language in which you can combine with data and say, oh, this treatment is extremely effective. So what gives me the audacity now to claim that no one could articulate those questions in scientific language prior to maybe 1920. And I tell you why I'm going there. How can I say that? We had all the science and astronomy and thermodynamics and elementary particles. There is something strange about science. Science is built on algebra. So if you have an equation such as y is equal to ax, it's symmetric. So x is equal to y over a. And all the science that children learn in high schools is built around algebra. That's how they solve homework problems. That's how physicists think. I didn't say that's wrong. They don't think that way. They write that way. Different. So if we talk about let's x be the atmospheric pressure and y be the movement of the barometer. We can say that y is proportional to x. Makes sense. But you and me know that it is the pressure that causes the movement of the barometer and not the other way around. So you ask yourself where is the asymmetry in the equality sign? It's not there. But we live with it because we are smart and we have the model of the world and high school children can solve the problem with the algebra that they get. But when you give it to a robot, the robot might make a mistake because a robot doesn't have this model of the world. It doesn't know about the movement of the barometer. So there is no reason why the robot would not attempt to move the barometer or to squeeze it in order to prevent the rain to move. On the basis of the equation, it cannot be done. But you need another ingredient here to introduce the asymmetry. Makes sense? How do you do that? In computer science we have a trick. We call it assignment operator. If you assign to a register the content of another register, we call it assign to the content of another. It's not a quality sign. It's asymmetrical. It's assignment. And here it is. No, no, no, no. It's right here. It's an arrow. At least we can be designated by an arrow. And this is the source of the graphs that you're going to see soon in my talk. And in almost every, except in economics, almost every paper on causal reasoning. You see a quarter of a graph. And this is a meaning of it. Assign. Which means nature assigned to the barometer a certain degree of movement after listening to what atmospheric pressure is. And tell why thou shalt take on a value equal to a coefficient times the pressure. So nature is a society of listeners. This is the code of perception of the world. Everything that you see around you, including the Tower of Pisa and the Nose of Cleopatra, goes by listening. A variable, temperature, pressure, movement, speed, momentum. Each of those variables is an entity. It can be thought of as an agent listening to other agents in its environment, on its field, they call it. And react accordingly. If you acquire this conception of nature, then you are in the causal land, in causality land. Now we are going further and we are going to talk about this causality land in the following sense. When you go down and you write down the rules of this operator, assignment operator, you find out there is a certain mathematics that governs it. It's an algebra that governs all assignments. And it is segmented modularly into a hierarchy of three levels. On the bottom you find association. On top of it you find intervention. On top of it you find counterfactuals. Some people say this is an eye opener. But it comes from the mathematics. I didn't invent it. Most of the time you write a cognitive scientist, I taxonomize human ability according to the following theorem. Fine. That's his theory. This is not my theory. It comes from the algebra. You can prove that you cannot answer a question at level i unless you have information coming from level i or higher. So you cannot answer questions but interventions if all your habits are associations. As a station, we know it is a slogan saying that correlation is not causation. This is what it means. If causation entails predicting the effect of actions, then you cannot do that. You cannot predict the effect of action from observation only. If you observe the correlation between children's reading ability and the side of their thumb, you find correlation. This is not causation in the sense that taking class in reading would not make your thumb grow any faster. So you have age being the confounder, they call it. Any book on statistics you find many, many examples that correlation is not causation, fine. Of course I'm going to ask the next question. So what is causation if correlation isn't? I'm not going to discuss the philosophical struggle of what causation is. I'm going to say that what information you need to answer certain questions, that is what I'm going to ask. What type of information? So let's start with the association. If I see something, I want to infer what my belief is going to be. If I see symptoms, I want to know what my belief in disease is, vice versa. Prediction and retradiction. This is all under association. Satisticians can do it very well. And this is where machine learning excels. Handling association. It's not easy. I'm not going to talk much about that level because I have so many experts here in the room that are doing it. It's not easy because when you have the curse of dimensionality, it's not easy to predict the disease if you have even 20 symptoms, type of symptoms. The curve, the associational curve is very complex. Heels and valleys with local minima and local maxima and it's horrendous. And neural nets, machine learning, all these techniques are able to configure this complex terrain of prediction. Nice. What next? I want to predict if I take an aspirin, will my headache be cured? That's a simple question which I cannot just look at the data and tell because maybe I was cured. I would about to be cured anyhow. So I need to do experiment. Normally done with experiment. You need intervention in order to predict the result of interventions. What is the banned cigarette? I put it there because it was never done successfully. But still, we would like to stipulate and argue about what the possible effect would be if you banned cigarette successfully. Would it be a black market from Canada? We can communicate like that and imagine and enjoy the prediction of what our understanding of the world tells us about the success or the in-success of banning. And I'm going to put it down in action that never occurred because this is what the difference is between machine learning including the RL. Learning from actions. Reinforcement learning. Reinforcement learning is essentially learning by remembering actions that you have taken by evaluating the results of actions you have taken. And then you can mimic it in gameplay and in real life. So that's a difference. We are talking about the ability to stipulate and to predict things that we haven't seen yet. Counterfactuality is definitely we haven't seen. Was it the ice plane that stopped my headache or was it the television program I watched? Or the good news I got? Would Kennedy be alive if Oswald had not shot him? We're going back in time. What if Hillary won the election? And don't tell me, okay, hypothetical. This is what you're reading in New York Times. Constantly. It's loaded, saturated with counterfactual terms. That is the most efficient means of communication. If you want to convey the idea quickly, succinctly, you say, I had Hillary been in charge, we wouldn't have this problem. Let's call it imagining, retrospection, understanding. It's really answering the question why. But you cannot answer those questions if you have randomized experiments. From experiments alone, you cannot answer them. You need a theory. Then you can have philosophically, where does the theory come from? Good question. We are working on that. Because everything comes from the senses. It's not mine. Next question. This is, to my opinion, the most convincing example that we need a new logic here to deal with the new element, element of causation. It's called the Simpson paradox. You can see on the right that if you exercise more, your cholesterol level goes up on the average. On the right hand side, you see what we expect to see. That the more you exercise, in every age group, the more you exercise, the cholesterol level goes down. So this is more satisfying to us. On the left. You can see there. This is more satisfying to our intuition than that one. However, the difference is only that we were smart enough to segment the data into age groups. And the question now is why would you believe the left is opposed to the right? The answer is because we have this notion that age is affecting the people's ability to exercise. At the same time, age also affects their cholesterol level. Therefore, it is a confounder. And therefore, if you want to get the correct answer to the question of what should I do? Should I exercise or not? Now we should look at every age group into the age-specific data and not into the collapse data. Everybody agrees with me. And normally, you find this in every textbook on statistics and they finished here. We explained it now. Done. It can happen in the data. We understand why. But we are building robots. For us, it's not down. For us, the next question is why not? What gets you... What makes you rebellious against this idea that you have here a situation where in every age group the exercise reduces cholesterol? However, in a population as a whole, it increases. There is something intuitively wrong here. Let's make it even easier. So you make it easier. Here you have a drug which is good for men and good for women, but is bad for a person. You laugh and it's all funny. What is the logic in your intuition that tells you, hey, it can't be. Can you derive it that cannot be? No. We cannot derive it. It's an extra logical intuition. There is no mathematics. It can tell you there is no logic in existence. It tells you that a drug like that cannot exist. It is good for men, good for women, but it's bad for a person whose gender you don't know. You all feel that there is something jumping in your stomach. It cannot be. I feel so too, I admit you, but I am a toolmaker. I want the robot to have this feeling. So I need to have a logic according to which a robot will scream. Impressive. What is that logic? It turns out only the logic of causation, something the new entity that I was talking about, can give you that rebellious feeling. It comes from the, also it's related to the shoe things principle of Savage. Some of you read the history of statistics. But Savage was smart enough to say it doesn't follow any logic that I know. The next question is, of course, for the robot is, is exercise helpful or not? I don't know my age. I have to decide it for the entire population. And I don't know the age. Is it helpful or not? And that cannot, that is not answered in any of the statistic textbooks. Why? Because you don't have the algorithm governed by this new logic to decide yes or no. Should we or shouldn't we recommend exercise? Some people say it's more specific. Therefore, it's more reliable. It's wrong. Because if you take other kind of characteristics, not age, but for instance, the use of seed builds, it turns out you can get the same effect, the use of seed builds. And the answer is no. The correct answer is in aggregated data, not in this seed belt specific data. So it depends on the causal structure. It depends on the causal story. You cannot get it strictly from the data. Oh, great. Maybe I should open it up for five minutes of question before I go to the five pillars, seven pillars of causal wisdom. Questions? Why would you look at either of those graphs and say, is the interpretation this one or this one? In both cases, the interpretation is the same. There is no causality to interpret it either. I'm talking about your intuition. With you, by the left, it was categorized. Left's categorized or right. Which one you would consult when you have to decide whether or not exercise is different? Neither. Neither? Yeah. Why? Because it's just there. Just this is. However, your intuition tells you I'll consult the head. In my mind, I'm talking about intuition. No, forget about the question of what should I do, exercise or not. That's considered the full intuition. Why do you get irritated when I tell you I had a drug here, a miracle drug? Good for men, good for women, bad for a person. Because there are certain elements are wrong, all of them. You cannot say that it's good for men. You can say that there is a correlation between people. No, no, no. I'm saying I'm telling you good, which means men usually improve if they take it. Here's the truth. I'm talking about your causality. Okay. That is the language that you understand. You don't understand causality. You learn correlation in statistics whether or not you're not born with it. I'm telling you a language that my nine year old grandchild understands. Drug is good for you or drug is bad for you. I understand. Correlation is for courage. So I'm talking about the intuition that these weeks we are born. If you tell someone good for men, good for women, that is bad for a person. And he, in view of his rights, a drug like that was not invented and will never be invented. But where is the logic for that? The government will give us this intuition. This uneasy feeling in our stomach that a drug like that could not exist. Where does it come from? It cannot be derived from predicate life. No, can you do it with probability? It must come from some place. I'm telling you here, we have an organ in our mind here, which we haven't formalized yet, that needs to be formalized, that can account for this uneasiness in our stomach. Just a comment about reinforcement learning. We said it could not be used to predict the effect of an action that was done before. If you go to high-energy collection spaces, it's quite possible to train the RL system to generalize. Basically, methodology. If you train it when it has seen the effect of some actions, it can generalize other actions. Because we're not using things like tables. We're using things like real nets that can generalize. So it is possible. RL has its own problems with causality, but not that one. No, I think it is interesting. What do we rely on when we generalize? Is it surface similarity? Then we have many consequences. It might rely on a deeper similarity to having to do with good presentations that capture the causal factors of the action. That's great. So they must come from some causal agents. In some causal models. I agree with you, but the question is how you're going to structure these RL models. The structure is called causal reasoning or causal models. Yeah, I agree. There are different names for this. I hear a couple of conventions that the most important reason for causal reasoning is in agility. The thing is, it can change the head of an organ without changing the body of an organ. I agree. For agility. I don't agree with them, but I know statisticians who would say, there is statistical criteria for knowing which variables to look at the subset overall. It's exchange of variables. I don't agree with their reasoning, but I have a lot of people arguing against that. There is a paper by Livley and Nova in 1970 about the paradox and relying and explaining by exchange of variables. There is a subsequent paper by Clark and everyone who sits now, I think, is a student. Going carefully over the reasoning of Livley and looking at the idea of changeability and noticing that all the reasoning there is just causal. Dressed in the language of changeability. Another two, is changeability a statistical notion or causal notion? Oh, that's what you're saying, to agility is a call. Yeah. This is the way it is interpreted. It is the way it is housed in order to interpret this crazy intuition. I agree with that. Yes. I had a little problem on sending the analogy of something helpful for a man and women but not for a typical person. That graph was showing that it's typical for one group and a number but not for the aggregator group. So maybe the right analogy should be like it's good for a man or a woman but not good for the aggregate, like a man plus a woman. So I can imagine that you are a doctor and there is a patient waiting in the next room who is gentle you do not know. But you know that it's good for men and good for women. Are you going to subscribe this medicine to the unknown patient in the next room? I say yes. If it's good for men and good for women, it must be good for that person who is gender I do not know. Because that person must be either men or women. I am giving you an argument now which is causal and therefore if it's good for one and good for the other, it must be good for him or her. Even without knowing. Is that a convincing argument? That makes sense. I was just thinking that reminds me of an emerging property that comes out from the single combination of the ones. We don't have to deal with the aggregating or with the ensemble of that. We can deal with individuals, we can do it in the waiting room. If I have a drug that is proven to be effective for men and proven to be effective for women, I can tell this patient without knowing him or her, take it. Agreed? Where does this conviction come to you? Where did you get it? It's intuition, right? Well, intuition is governed by certain logic. One element of this logic is causal reasoning. One theorem of that logic is if it's good for men, good for men, even without knowing. It's really an exercise in epistemology. Even without knowing. Okay, we are now to the seven pillars. I'm going to talk about graphical models, which are really the basic of everything which is done in causal reasoning. Even by some people who hide the graphical intuition in their mind and refrain from publishing in this language. We know what they are guided by. Policy analysis became in the past two or three decades totally de-confounded. Counterfactuals became algorithmatized. That means that we can formulate them and look at data and decide if we can evaluate the counterfactual. If it's true or false, we can talk about probability of counterfactual. We can talk about bounds of the probabilities. It's done. It's there in the formalization. Correlation of that is that mediation analysis and the assessment of direct and indirect effect are formula as well. So we can answer questions such as discrimination, fairness, and so on. External validity in sample selection bias, this is something which we didn't expect to be in a causal domain. Environment change. No one manipulated it. Environment change. We have two environments and have different characteristics. I want to borrow information from one to another. Causal reasoning comes into play here because causality deals with the preservation of the invariance and the discarding of the transitory. The dissimilarities. Missing data is another area where it was fully developed. It was developed with torture in by statistician. We discovered, Karataka is here. She can witness to it that it is really a causal problem because we cannot do missing data without understanding what caused the missingness. If you do understand what caused the missingness, then you can do marvelous things that you couldn't do without it. Causal discovery, that would be the last one, which is a very promising area. Answering the question, where do causal models come from? Okay, I'll go one by one into it. How am I doing on time? Okay, but give me a date. Oh, terrific. I'm getting better, right? We go back. Okay, something happens in the 1980s. Graphs and probabilities shook hands. You can say, what is common to graphs and probabilities? It's really a story, like two totally strange entities, mathematical objects. Suddenly, they find that they have something in common. What happened is, the Bayesian network came into being and allowed people, statisticians and AI people, to capture probabilistic knowledge and manipulate probabilistic knowledge, updating by using message passing effectively, compactly, with the nice properties that computer scientists would like to have, which didn't exist when you have to specify a probability distribution in the way that you learn them in textbooks. The full table where every possible instantiation is listed there. That's super exponential. What was, it was a gift of God, coincidence. That what? That the actions of conditional independence and the actions of graph separation share a common core. Lucky, gift of God. That gave us the ability to capture conditional independence in graphs. The core of axioms is called graphoids. If you look up encyclopedia, Wikipedia, that's the only place we're going to find it. And it gave the equatorial called this operation that allows you to look at the path in the diagram and decide which two variables are independent, condition on the values of a third. We can learn it in five and a half minutes. Some disciplines, it takes 30 years and still I don't want to offend anybody. No, it really takes, you really want to learn it. It takes five, 10 minutes to get the separation, but you have to be committed. I'm going to invest these five minutes. So I'll be able to talk with other people. Okay, so let me go over that a little bit, just a tiny bit, because it's important. Here's what I meant by dictating the conditional independence by just looking at the graph. Assuming you have a simple toy problem and I am a great believer in toy problems. You can talk a lot about an area, but without solving a real toy problem with your own fingers, you know, you don't get the feel. Okay, so here I'm talking, I'm giving you a toy problem. When you wake up in the morning and you find that the driveway is wet and you try to figure out what caused it, if the sprinkler was on or rain and you know that the climate is dry and so forth. So it's a simple problem of reasoning. I can exemplify here, I can illustrate here the three levels of the hierarchy. Association, intervention and counterfactual on this simple example. And this is what I'm going to do. Okay, so what does it all present? First we said that life consists of a society of listeners. Listeners means that the wetness of the ground listens to the sprinkler and it listens to the rain and act, react accordingly. And the rain listens to the climate, the sprinkler listens to the climate because that's the way we set it. Okay, that should not turn on unless it's summer and so on. Okay, behind that comes the response function. How you respond to after you listen. And this is how it looks, okay? We say that the wetness is a function of the parents, namely of the sprinkler on the rain and some noise. In our case it would be an or gate plus noise. Noise could be a neighbor's dog or something. So you see each one of them is a function, corrupted by noise. The noise is something which shows not to mother. It comes from unexpected phenomena that we decided not to include in our math. It's arbitrary and our choice. If you want to capture the noise too, you have to go and look at other possible causes of wetness. It's doable, but there is always a limit to the modeling where you put a boundary over the domain which you decide to include in the math. This is what the graph stands for. There are functions there. You may know them or you may not know them. You may know part of it. You can say you may know that they are monotonic for instance. You may know that the arrows are independent, but otherwise we leave it open. Everything is open. That's what we call non-parametric analysis. There are functions there that are hidden from me, but the mere idea of me postulating their existence gives me a tremendous power. Give me the power of computer science. We assume something and then we go from there to the conclusion. Without that you sit there and you say, what should I do? The next step is assume that there exists and assume that you know them. You reason counterfactually, had I known these functions, what would I be able to do? Then you go the next step. I don't know them. Perhaps I know I can get only bounds on my questions and so on. That is the key to understand that the world is made of the society of listening agents. It turns out that if the use here, the arrow terms are independent, that regardless of the form of the function, the independency that will be induced on the data are readable from the graph. Independent on the function themselves and independent on the probability that you assign to the use. So let's put a distribution that stands for and it means the following. That every missing arrow in the graph out will tie this conditional independent in the data. Where is the data by the way? Assuming you get up many times, many mornings, and you find sometimes the library is wet, sometimes it's not wet, it's statistical. So you have data on the available CSRW. So here what the theorem says. Every missing arrow in the tag is directed as a graph. Advertises a conditional independent in the data. Here is one, a missing arrow. Advertises the C is conditional independent on W, given S and R. What is S and R? The separating set. Separating C from W. There is another missing arrow. So we write down S and R are independent, given C only and not W for reasons that I delay discussion. It takes five and a half minutes to sort out. It's called a collider. Collider doesn't get into the separating set. Okay. Now we are in possession of ability to read conditional independencies in the data. Applications, model testing. If an advertiser, conditional independency doesn't exist in the data, you know the model is wrong. Beautiful. Structural learning. You cannot imagine that you take some total of all models that are compatible with the data, and that gives you a subset of models to work with. Sometimes it's small subset, and sometimes the answer to your query is true or false in all members of the subset. It's also good. I'm going to talk about another feature that comes from there. It's reducing scientific question to adjustments, adjustment of variables, all to symbolic calculus. And that's what I'm after. So let's go down to pillar two. Policy analysis. That's where we need to have questions of intervention. The problem is very simple. Determine if effects of a given policy or action can be estimated from data, and if so, how? Policy analysis. Governs econometrics. Governs pedigology. Governs every field. Every field. They can think of. Social science. So it has all kinds of names for that. Evidence-based policy. In the news. I never understood what evidence-based policy is, but that's my personal weakness. You may have understood. Anyone understand what it is? Evidence-based policy analysis. What policy analysis works without evidence? How is that to put the evidence into a decision? I don't know. And as you go to this exercise. But news has the habit of capturing public attention. Policy-based are probably the billions of dollars poured into studies in policy-based or evidence-based policy. I promise you a solution is totally demystified. It is used to a game. A game involves recognizing in the code graph that you postulate certain patterns. One of them is backdoor. Another one is front door. The third one is options for doing a whole calculus, do calculus. And that at the end of which will tell you yes or no. You have enough knowledge to predict the effect of policies or you don't have enough knowledge. And if you have enough, I'll tell you how you should go about and predicting it. I should leave it here for a second. To digest it. The problem is essentially solved by postulating. If of course if you have the model. But look at the model. The model is just a graph. It's a qualitative conceptual relationship with identity. It has no number. They're just saying, yeah, I think that the... ...cancel listens to smoking. It's not the other way around. So it's your conception of who listens to whom in nature. That all that is required there. And I'm going to now brag to you and show you how much power this simple conceptual guidance can bring up. Can give us. And guide machine learning. The result of this exercise will tell machine learning people what you should estimate. Whether you should estimate the effect of the drug on every age group. The effect of exercise on every age group. Or on the overall assembly of a subject. Aggravated data. So the graph, the simple graph, the conceptual graph, would guide the machine learning into what needs to be estimated to answer the query. The query is going to give me the effect of intervention on a certain outcome. Here we are. I'm going to do it here. The separate is to distinguish between seeing and doing. This is a boundary between the first rank of the ladder and the second one. Doing is different in the sense that you get different conclusions from doing that you can get from seeing. If I see the sprinkler on, I can infer that it must be a dry season. I go backward and forward. I can predict that the ground is wet. Also that the season must be dry. Otherwise, they wouldn't set up the controller in that way. But if I do sprinkle on, turn the sprinkler on with your own muscle. That means overcome and undo and disable all the previous factors that made the sprinkler all enough. Season and your uncle and whatever. And exercise your muscle and turn it on. How do we express it? Chop off all arrows that previously connected into the variable manipulated sprinkler. Chop them off. And subject this variable to your muscle. And we turn it on. Instantaneously to the variable to the variable true. This new model is being created by this. The prediction that you make in this model, answer the question what will happen if I turn the sprinkler on. What you can predict here will answer the question what would you believe if the sprinkler happened to be on. If it happened to be on, I can put the season back on and say oh, the season must be dry. And then, if you very much use the laser. Ah, the laser, yes, yes. But I have to go backward here so I can go here. Yeah, this will be better. You see here, I can go backward. If the sprinkler is on, I can infer that there is no rain. Because the season is dry. Here, I cannot do that. Because there is no connection between that variable and that variable. This doesn't transmit any information. It's a collider. So you see the difference between predictions. I can make in manipulated model versus the unmanipulated model. This is the difference between seeing and doing. Now we can build a logic to handle all this kind of mutilated models. For one thing you can do is here. I can simulate that even if I don't have the ability to physically manipulate the sprinkler. I can predict what will be the result of such a mutilated model by looking at the original model. I can manipulate it in my mind, in chuck of this arrow. Or I can do something, I can instantiate it by conditioning on season. Which chuck of this line, this arrow, exactly like it was chucked here. So I can do analytical work in lieu of physical work. And the neighbors asked too, answer the question, what will happen if I turn the sprinkler on? I can do even better. Or I can do counter factor. What if the sprinkler went on? So I measure the grass is wet. The pavement is wet. Now you are telling me all the conclusion that you have that the season must be raining. Whatever the probability of the season being dry, probability of rain being on and so on. And now you say based on this information I'm going to make sure that the sprinkler is on. What if the sprinkler went on in the past? So I go back in history and now I do the mutilation. Boom! The season probability has been updated by what I know about the sprinkler. I go up, update the probability of season. I chuck of this arrow to simulate the predicate. The sprinkler on. And then I predict. I did a different answer. So here I have a possibility of simulating counter factor, predict interventions and associations. And if you notice the counter factor computation in those three steps. Update the probability of history. Bend the history to the potential of chopping off. To make sure that the antecedent is realized. And then you predict. Three step process. But it's doable. Once you reduce it to a process. Then you have the comfort in every model dictates. All the counterfactuals are dictated by a fully specified model. Okay. I go one step further. Ah, you're ready. Being, being, being. Here is the demonstration of the do calculus. What the calculus can do for you on a problem that is not easy. But I can convey to you the problem by in English. You can tell you that the. The answer is called by Tara cumulative in the land. It's a result of smoking. We understand that. But you can have also a confounder that make people. And at the same time put them in a hands of this. So you can have a domestic unobserved. It's an example which is called the front door, which I use since 1995. But it's a good example for a corner which is easier to articulate. There is a problem. You understand how to solve it. Can you solve it? I mean, not you. You challenge you. You can have any suggestion. I'm not sure. I promise you the answer in 1997. It's not doable with any other mechanism except for rough and the book I did. So it's challenging on one hand. But I didn't put it for you to brag about the ability to solve it. But you have to show you what it means to solve. It's not about the story. It's nothing but the story. And now we are about to solve it. What does it mean to solve? There is a machine learning guy waiting for me and asking me how do I exercise the data? What do I do to get the answer? I have to give him the answer in a form that he can translate into an estimation algorithm. The question that I'm asking is the effect of smoking, making sure that I smoke, right? Do smoke. Whether or not you want to. It's what it means to make a smoking on campus. On campus. This is a question. Look, I have here a duo here. I cannot tell that through a machine learning guy. What do I estimate? I have a data on smoking, car and cancer. All have it. Don't have one on a journey. And the answer is I'll tell you what you should do. Let me go to some exercise. I'm doing a good job here. And I'm going to eliminate the duo. And give you the answer in the format that you enjoy. It's a format that has a conditional probability. Not duo, that's white symbols there. Prodiction of target and air. Observe and compute by regression. You estimate each term here by regression. How did I go from that to that? How did I eliminate the yellow symbol? I have three rules. The part of the duo card rule, which for every pattern of graph, gives me a nice, you can exchange that, exchange that, it's not a good integration by part. And then if you succeed to eliminate all the yellow symbols, you say victory. Hey, machine learning department, I got something for you that you can learn. And when you learn that, it will be a valid answer to the question that I asked you. I don't want to go to details of the rules. They're very simple. For example, in that format, I can eliminate the duo card if I have a certain condition in the graph. I can exchange, I can remove one duo card to the other. I can remove this duo and get only the duo team. And so on. Massage, massage, massage, massage. Not only that, it's now I go with the time. Which means you don't have to go through the step by step. The elevation, you can just look at the performance of the algorithm. And for normal time, you can find that you get this answer. It has even implemented that in the software. So if you're interested, if you have a complex graph, we can do it on three variables, four variables. And it's time to fire variables already. I don't know if any human that can do that. So you have the software available. It will deliver for you, what is it named? The name, name, estimate. That which you ought to estimate. Sometimes the estimates are not standard. You don't find this as an estimate. But it is an estimation loop. You can see. Conditional probability is. Conditional probability is. Contemplation is doable, right? And then you sum over all as 5 or 3. It's not easy. If you have small amount of data and many variables, it's not easy. But that will be have empire called machine learning. Separate from this, I suppose. Nice thing about the levels is about the cause of reasoning. You can modelize it and you can divide the label. I'll do the identification part. You do the estimation part. Maybe it is a third part. But we can divide the label. But don't tell me you can do estimation without identification. It's undoable. But you're going to estimate will be something which is unrelated to the query. We have a query, very clear query in human language. Given the effect of smoking on cat. I can stop here. I would like to stop here if you have any questions. Because I made some daily remark. What exactly is the do function there? What exactly is the do function in the equations? What does it mean? What do you mean by a set of smoking on cat? What do you mean? You took any class in statistics? You know how to measure the effect of... If they could perform the experiment, it was more than legal to do the experiment on the effect of smoking on cat. What do they do? They take population, not quite the pandemic in the two parts. They should go into the control room. They should not smoke even if you want to. They should go into the other room. They should smoke three packs a day whether you want it or not. In prevention. That's what doing. Randomize the experiment is not only randomization. It is intervention. Forcing the people in the treatment room to smoke so many packs a day against their national information. They got an answer to it. But this is what randomize control experiment stands for. Randomize plus forcing intervention. That's what they might do. I want to know the result of this randomize experiment. Since I cannot perform it because of legal and moral issues. I imagine it or analyze what I do well and try to come out with the prediction. This is a prediction. It's not your prediction yet. It's just an estimate. If you estimate this quantity, then you get an answer to this out of this world question. So here you control both the smoking and the tar. So you have to apply to... I have data on the speeder. Boom, boom, boom. I don't have data on that. So you are controlling both? I have 15 minutes. 15? Oh, I have to write. Can you clarify the difference between this and just changing the graphical model removing the arrows into smoking and then doing normal calculations of probability in a graphical model? I don't know what the standard is. You want to change the model? Yeah. Fine. If you suggest that you remove the arrows into smoking and set the values to 0. Yeah, you remove the arrows and you do it. That would require me to know and to measure the data type. You can marginalize over it. You can do what? You can marginalize over it. It's an instrument. I'm sure. It's still marginalizing. I can do it. I'll do that then I get the expressions. You can involve conditioning on you. Right. What do I do then? I cannot measure you. You can estimate it. No, I said why? If I estimate you it's not the same as measuring you. I have to be able to estimate conditional probability where the conditioning part contains you. Fine, we do that all the time in machine learning. I'll be doing the variables. You condition on those? I'll be doing the variables, yeah. You have expressions involving conditioning on those? You're not marginalizing. The problem that you're suggesting you're not marginalizing. You see a difference. There is an effect on genotype to causing you to smoke. Yes, yes. You say well do the surgery and then marginalize, right? I'll hide it over genotype. Do the surgery and marginalize. But then you have to marginalize over that. You have to find smokers, make them smoke regardless of the genotype and do the same for the other population if you can. You can perform the mathematical operation but it will not return that. I think the question is different. Okay. I think the question is so that we can measure you. Then we get expression involving conditioning on you. A question like that where you are feeling some conditioning problem. Then you say we can do it. Machine learning, right? Because we have expression involving unobserved delivery. Yes. And we do some tricks to replace it with other expressions. We do not involve that. We do not involve conditioning on you. I don't know how you do it but I can guarantee you so what we do here, do there, we'll not apply here. Why? Because I have to go to the room. You can never go from level one to level two without having cold arms. What we are doing here is violating that room. Okay. Okay. Have ten minutes on it. The cultural respect with 30 minutes, right? No, no. We have questions interleaved with... You don't try to do 20 minutes. Yeah, good. I have 20 minutes. And they love to keep you alive. I'll show you what I can do in 20 minutes. Yeah. Okay. I go to pillar three. The other explanation of counterfactual. Given a model, the data, determine if Joe's salary would be... What Joe's salary would be had a one year of education. I know that all people in education department are desiring to know that. Also in economics, to know the value of education. And they also measure, they always measure the value of education in terms of salary. It's a human resource. Okay. So the solution is the probability of every counterfactual can be computed or bounded using the surgery and procedure that I showed you. And the correlaries and applications are causes of effect. And attributions, kind of questions, can be formulaized. Example attribution. Example in the code of law. The lawyer comes in and say, my client died because he used his drug. So the manufacturer of the drug is liable and needs to compensate the deceased family. And what is the rule of law? Interesting, the law says something about it. And express it in counterfactual terms, which we are going to mathematical and evaluate numerically. In a second. So the copsoe, yeah. I did the right thing. Yeah. The criterion should be, if it's more probable than not, that Mr. A would be alive but for the drug. That's how it is written down in the books of law. It's not exactly like that, but it's in the code, needs to decide whether or not it's more probable than not, that the plaintiff would be alive and so on. Notice that we have here a probabilistic term. And we have here a counterfactual term. But if you go back history and say the word, it would be a lie. Not only would it be a lie, we know that it didn't take him right. And we know that he is dead. And these are two important pieces of information that makes him not a random person in the population. No, it's a kind of person that needed the drug, otherwise he wouldn't have taken. A kind of person that died. We don't know why he died, but he died. So these two pieces of information must be incorporated before we give the court the desired probability. Is it higher or not than 50%? You cannot write it in any way except by counterfactual. He's dead, he's too too bad, and we decided that probability is greater than 50% of what? Bli had he not, and therefore you have a substitute here, which you put here, and the sentence of the counterfactual had he not taken the drug. Now it can be done, it can be bounded, and in the book Causality I showed example where it is actually one. Which means the data is arranged in such a way that the jury has no recalls but to declare the guy guilty. So here's an example where statistical data can determine the guilt or innocent of an accused based on frequency data only. And the model. How much is the model? The model is entering here slightly. Because the bounds are quite universal. Okay, so let's go on to the next one. I want to show you a way how the problems are formulated in three different languages and what the trade-offs are between various presentations. I must include that because I've been involved in the past three weeks in the other Twitter with contenders. I don't use drug, I can do it with other techniques. And somebody tells you other techniques, you need to be suspicious. Because it is just simply undoable by other techniques. And I'm taking a risk here, I risk my reputation in making this statement. It's undoable cognitively. And I'll show you what is at stake here. Let's take a simple problem and we know our problem is the power of cancer. Here is the problem expressed in English. The way I explained to you earlier, I just put this for a demonic purpose, not to bias the whole graph. I can take the graph, so that that has to remember the story. This is the story. Now I'm going to get some, a little bit more form. And that's mapping. From my mental model, I map it into a formal graph with the understanding that behind the arrows there are certain unknown functions. I don't even know either. I just take that. Now I continue. I can go to the do calculus. I can do all kinds of manipulations, mutations, whatever I do. I work only with that. The understanding is that each of those variables, you see some noise factor, X, X, Y, Z, they are independent. And this is unobserved. It's a bit smoking into the cancer. I work with that only with understanding that this is behind it. And all the stars are unknown. That was what I showed you earlier with the do calculus. Now I'm switching to a presentation called potential outcome. Let me know what is involved here. It's the same story expressed in potential outcome. What is potential outcome? It's the collection of counterfactual. For instance, the value of X at Z being small z for a unit U, for a very small U of U, is equal to X of U, this is under constraint, written in the language of counterfactual. The value of Z at X being small z, X is independent on the conjunction of the value of Y at Z being small z, the joint with X. You have to understand those. And believe me, those are the same assumptions that are conveyed in the graph. They are one to one for math. So I can convey the assumptions made by the story in two languages. The one I showed you before, just taking the graph and working with it. All I can convert it to the language where some expectations are more comfortable. If it is a language in which they are more comfortable. Why? Because it doesn't help us. That's the reason. Both historically, personally and culturally, that is the reason why they feel more comfortable. Everything here is statistics. Look at that. There's no graph. Conditioning independence is very known in statistics. They swim comfortably in that language. And because they swim comfortably with it, equality is very known in statistics. And condition independence is very known. So they feel comfortable in that area. And they write papers after papers after papers after papers. Trying to convey to the people. And alternative representation. The next thing to do is to ask yourself questions. This never asks itself. And this is the question of cognitive perspective. And this is reduced to something that we can, we, computer science, understand very well. We can ask the question. Here, let's remove the graph from the world and reply us. This is what we study in exercise. Let's look at the carefully. This is the darkest we reach. 80% of causal reasoners today are walking in. This is the darkest. And you can ask yourself, hey, is it very friendly? Not only very friendly. How do you consist? There is a reasonable question to ask. Perhaps one of them violates the other. Next question. How do you complete? Which means maybe I forgot one. There is a bunch of counterfactual theories. You're wondering, have I counted all of them? Perhaps I have missed one. Correct? Next one. Are they redundant? Which means that one of them is like the other. If it's an extra many. All these are complete computer science calculations that we can try to answer. If they are not answerable here, they are answerable in the graph. Next one. Are they plausible? Because I gave them, right? The researchers put them down. So they should be plausible. He or she should stand behind the possibility of each one of those assertions. Can you stand behind any of them? Yes, I know a couple of people who can stand behind them. And there are reasons. Z of x is the result of experiments. You run to my x and you observe z. And then the result would be independent of the result of the experiment. If you run to my z and observe z and so on. They can reason and reason. It's a torment. It's a torture. But they can do that. Which means, which means, if you challenge them and say, can you, they can do that. And they can write five pages of the result of the experiment. If you run to my x and you observe z, it should be independent of the result of another experiment. They can do that. And I've seen them do that. But I presented here purposely for people who are trying to use other formulas. In this case, potential asthma. There could be another one invented tomorrow. What does it mean a model? A model is a collection of assumptions about the world. I can express assumptions using the graph, which I did before. I can express them in those terms. These are assumptions. Constraints of the possible behavior of people. However, some assumptions are transparent, compact, meaningful, and some are not. And the last one, which I put, testable. Can you tell me if the data can confirm or refute anything? Or the totality of this? In the graph, if you just do this operation, you can say yes or no. Here, you have to go through compressed logic to find out if they have any testable implications. So, I'm going to finish my personal argument with a potential outcome. And I'll go to a pillar for mediation analysis. It's also an area which requires counterfactual thinking. Why? I mean, actually, there's that in a minute. Let's talk about the example of discrimination. Can you... can data confirm the existence of the retrofit of gender on hiring, which is not mediated by multiplication? The employer is not responsible for discrimination based on hiring, and the fact that in our society, education is a different education of that. So, that is conglomerate, and that part is punishing. So, you have to find out if the direct effect exists. How do you handle it? Well, decades of familiarization analysis in such an equation are assumed, conditional and then each up of this path, whatever correlation remains, is accountable by direct discrimination. Direct attention to the gender. But that's wrong because if you look at this operation, if you have any compounder, it can vary, and why any conditional area gets the famous mediation policy. It's very difficult compounder here, and even if you don't have any direct effect, you will find a correlation of partial correlation between X and Y given M. So, what do we do? We use a dual equation, but the only one is fixed qualification. Do it. That is one way of doing it, but what are you going to fix for it? It's quite possible that there is discrimination in the higher management and not discrimination in the lower paying jobs. So, which value of M would you put in order to decide if the employer is discriminating? Well, one way is to put other. Look at the higher paying job and lower paying job as well. That's one way. The other way you want to summarize it in some way, and that leads to a kind of function term. Look at the law, the book of law, and that's how it becomes discrimination. Unprobably, the employer would have, after differences, had the employee been over different sex and qualification had been the same. So, you have two kinds of actual years, one would have after differences, and then had the employer been and had been the same. It has nested front of actual years, but it doesn't scare us because we know that every kind of function can be algorithmic. When we go to the side, this obeys our heads, we invite that kind of nested mess. It doesn't scare the... This is not again not taking for me, it's a court of law. It can be algorithmic, guys. I wouldn't go over that. There are formalities, formalities, and positions for identifiability of what you need to have, and graph you need in order to identify what you need to identify to get an estimate. So, the machine learning people go to the side and say, let me go and examine you correctly to come out with the estimate that you gave me. The result of which will be the degree at which there is discrimination in this company. Three or five. I'm doing well in time, right? This is a combination of problems. All of them have to do with generalization. And you know the science is all about generalization. It's immortalized by Nancy Carpenter, who was the first kind of a robot. What works here will also work elsewhere. I think DARPA has invested billions of dollars to solve this problem in machine learning. Environment change. Robot is trained in my mind. Environment change is no longer... Learning. Ever since I was a child, I've never been to the lab. They call it transfer learning, they call it robustness, they call it life-loving learning. If you go into the history of DARPA and read the change of names, you understand. And you can't remember how much they invested. I don't want to criticize DARPA, I'm just telling you, you wouldn't solve it unless you go and understand that this is a causal problem. What does it mean to generalize? It means preserve the commonality and discard the illusory. Why do we assume that if you conduct experiments online, it will somehow be applicable to human beings in certain areas? We know that the digestive system is different, but maybe it's the same for man-given people. So we preserve the commonalities and we discard the diversities. That's what we do in our mind when we generalize from a laboratory to the field. The minds to people and so on. But now we want to do it with DARPA, right? Now the robot doesn't have an experimental mind, so it must be formulaic if you expect the robot to decide whether or not or how to change to what if I behave in accordance to comply with the changing environment. Yeah, I already mentioned that this position is the management of the invariance in the environment. So how do we manage environment? Here's the problem again. You want to amulti what you learn in the new environment, but what you learn is only applicable on the commonalities between the two environments. And the solution is, as I was given by Elias, in the year 2016. So there is a, usually a loop calculation, you can have a representation called a selection diagram which identifies all the stipulations. What portion of the environment are different and what are likely to be the same? Once you do that, then you have the answer. And by the way, what changes and not changes is not in the probability solution. It's in the mechanism behind the data, not in the data. I think we can show you two different questions in which the data remains the same, but the mechanism changes and you have to deal with it differently. So here is the problem how it is manifested once you learn to really source out of information. And you want to, not only to generalize into new environment, but to pick up from each one whatever contribution pertains to the target question. I'm sure in this way, you are trying to estimate the cold effect of X and Y in some unknown country called Arkansas. You don't know much about Arkansas except for serving. This is an example in social equity policy. No, actually it's an exercise in the future of medicine. But you have data from other sources. You have the altitude in New York, survey data, resembling the target very much. And here is the data coming from Los Angeles, but it's younger people. So the age is different. Boston has mostly successful world. You don't know how they behave. And San Francisco has a nice study, but it turns out that patients suffer from high post-vacation blood pressure. So each environment has its own ingested blood feature. And you need to task is to integrate all these sources of data. Just a future of medicine. Big data. Big data by you not only many samples, but also by you many sources of information. Which might include, which might if you are lucky, include for you as a patient. Oh, people in your class. It's heavy. But if you formalize them, it becomes a problem. And how you formalize them? Each source of data is characterized by the mechanism that generated the data. As an indicator, to what degree that data source is similar or different from the target source. Here I have a yellow arrow entering into S. S might be age. So the age, every age of it, it was different from ours itself. Here it enters here, which tells you the function that connects X to W, if it was here, then in our pencil. I don't know how it differs. All I can tell you is it differs. Which means it's suspect of being different. Therefore try to neglect it and choose only arrows which are the same. You see the relation between Y and W here is the same as Y and W. I didn't put any yellow into Y. So somebody has to transcribe it and subscribe it. Subscribe the yellow squares here and tell you, watch out for possible differences between our pencil and your, in terms of age or in terms of heterogeneous response to the graph. Now if you have it there, come to our room. How come Duke-Arden, how come all the machinery is prepared for solving the policy evaluation program and come to an answer. Yes or no? Yes means yes. The collection of these sources enables you to answer the target query unbiasedly. Or no, you need more information. If yes, I'll tell you exactly what to pull from each source, how to put them together so as to synthesize the answer to your query. Use your query. Find the probability of Y giving Duke-X in Arkansas, P-Star. So this I believe is the future of personalized medicine. And I got a pill of six. And briefly, given data corrupted by missing values, and a model of what causes missingness, determine when relations of interest can be estimated consistently, as if no data were missing. So here I exemplify here the following. First I give you the results. You can do it. I exemplify here. This is the problem after missing data person faces. The table, the variables, some of them are corrupted by soil missing. If the patient didn't have, you could have sleep and didn't answer the question. So you forgot what was the cause of accident? There are reasons why... Oh, a sense of fate and due to bad weather, so you don't have data, only pressure and this and that. There are many, many reasons for data to be missing. If you understand the mechanism that causes missingness, then you can answer the question that you could not answer without it. So those are the literature that are not as soon as you have a model called missingness. They call it the missingness mechanism, but what they substitute for the missing mechanism is some conditional independence. It is the cause of problem. It's not statistical problem. By the way, I have acquired these high glasses, which I can take a paper and take it right away, it's also statistical. It is very difficult. You can do it in two seconds. If you find the graphs, it's not causing. If you don't find graphs, it's a mistake. If you find y sub x, and this is from the factory, okay, subscript, then it's causing. If not, if it has a conditional probability, then it's not causing. It's a system. Which means you can do it very nicely in machine learning techniques, but it will answer the question. So if you acquire this technique, it takes two seconds, the signature is in the symbols. And you can allow you to classify paper that you read into one category or another and know where the kind of techniques and thinking and ideology that is behind the paper. And the capability. So here's an answer. First of all, result of our work, there's no model blind estimate that can do that in high school. Given a missingness model, we can tell you yes or no in high school. Given a missingness model, we can also tell you whether or not it has testable implications. Because testability under missing is a different than testability under fully observed model. Here's an example of a missingness model. R is the variable which is one when you have a missingness and it is zero when you don't have a missingness. So here for instance, it tells you why is sometimes unobserved at random. The reason is random. But not connected, not testable at anything. But the missingness in X depends on Y. The missingness in Z depends on both X and Y. It only tells you who is the code, who is the code, not how much. Be aware that people with high salary tend to lie about the salary more than people with low salary. Just watch out for salary in the determinant in the missingness. Once you put it down in a graph form, then you can look at it. I can decompose it and provide a joint probability that can factorize it by the chain rule. And lo and behold, now I look at the graph. And the graph gives me license to supplement each term here with an R term. R is equal to zero. Here, bing, bing, bing, bing, bing, bing. I get this from the graph, conditional independence. Immediately. So I can supplement it with R is equal to zero. That means never mind the missingness here. Let's look at the fully observed values of X, Z and Y and X. The fully observed one will give you the correct answer. Once you decompose it that way, and mark it by the bin. And the answer is given to you in terms of something you can estimate together, machine learning. This is what you need to estimate. And testable implications. The two conditions that we are going to tell you about or not, it has testable implications. I have to go quickly, right? So I have five more minutes. I'd like to call on you. Please join me in my... In fact, only by taking my seriously, you can learn when they are not needed, when they are disposable, at even better. Thank you for helping me improve this problem. They are disposable. Peter Southern called it a discovery. This was the first... In 1993, 1991, the group was coming, they started there. There are two, you see, they... I haven't spent much work in this area. But the idea is that looking at the conditional interdependencies, advertised by the model, we can prune some models and admit some models as candidates. So I'm repeating what I said earlier. We can have a compact representation for the set of models which are compatible with mother. And this compact set can sometimes be sufficient to come up with answers to causal queries. There are more reasons to work about it. Discovering us, seeing it in the functions themselves, as a circle to do. So I just... Summarizing, I say, in certain, certain circles to do. And a big assumption, all the queries can be at least a lesson from this compatibility set. And I would like now to come to the last item, which is my favorite. Because I took the liberty of calling all these problems in cause of evolution. And people think that I invented it. No, I didn't. It was Gary K. who is a professor of political science, a post-computer scientist, and he does little graph, which makes everything causal. So he noticed that it is a revolution. We thought, it produces something that has been linked for the generation after generation, and finally came to some fruition. In my conclusion and my desk to machine learning in India, the data science is the science of the subject of reality and not of sub-wise data. And I think more of the work in machine learning, I don't want to criticize it. I do trouble by then. So, I'll be careful in interpreting data statisticians in the number of what is the number? In summarizing data. You get data, and you summarize it in statistics, you say, oh, the estimate, the mean is so much, the prediction of probability is so much. You summarize it as a feature, a feature of state. But the more official state is the purpose of statistic is to summarize data. They refer it to reduce data. And it is in the number of ever-sensitive states. Whatever is outside this summarization exercise is proclaimed to be outside the program of statisticians. Machine learning, and the fact that this is because by definition, if they want to learn, you look at data. And you want to be as close to data as possible and free from any external input, because external inputs can be like. The model is written and can be wrong. So you're trying to be as close to the person as possible, and to learn as much as possible from the data itself. Certain things cannot be learned on the high-tech. That the level of position test is there. So you need a model, quality model, conceptual model to assist to the learning process. You have to find a way to interpret it, you need to find a relationship between reality and data. It's a two-body problem. And the last one is the peak of revolution is telepathia. This peak is telepathia, although we have some very exciting ideas of how to automate scientists. How to encode social intelligence, empathy, more responsibility, a free will. When I make this statement, I say it again, we AI are going to solve the linked problem of free will. I'm saying it here again, where the red-mind lives. It will take a few years, but eventually, what else do we have to solve the problem? It means that philosophy and science are admitting that it's a scandal of philosophy. John Searle said it's a scandal of philosophy. For three times a year, you cannot solve a simple problem, and if you have a joke to play about and my money is, and I start with two, and one head I know, I have a sensation, a great sensation that I'm into touch it or not touching. I have the option. On the other hand, I know that I am a finance state machine, which means I was probably doing it. That's what they don't say, they don't know. Because the old days, they didn't say finance technology. In my own latest case, it was God. God knows that you don't touch it at all, right? God is only for science. He knows something you can do. So how can you do it? I say that God knows, and you have this terrific, vivid sensation that you have an option. How can you? It was a soul. And they passed it from generation to generation, the form of question. The form of the beautiful thing that I can't say who we have to shoot now, I say it in Hebrew, because I was learning. Everything is predicted, and the option, the permission is still given. That is the dilemma. It was proposed in the form of a solution. That was the solution of my readers. Conjunction of these two things. Everything is predicted, and still you have freedom to choose. It was passed from generation to generation, and the dilemma. But we AI are not solving it. Why? Because it's a matter of ingenuity. You have to construct robots that communicate with each other, and though they have free will. So that you will be able to tell the robots, you ought to have done better. You know how to do better. You have to stop on your own. Next time pass the ball to another player, and they are in situation of death. You should have known better. That was free will means. And I believe he was solving, because number one we had counter-culture. So we know what it means to roll back history and say, I should have done better. And what it means to have the option? There is some path, a neural path, that gives you the illusion that you have an option. We have to trace this path, perhaps in collaboration with newer scientists, that we have to... If we want to implement this thing, we have to create this path between the lower level registrants, which would not be able to move, and the cognitive level, that there is an option. Which is totally illusion. But somehow we are higher level, we say, I had an option. I now have an option. Even the robot, he only read, I had an option. He just follow the instruction. But there are many cases in science where you have conflict like that between level of obstructions. You never see in thermodynamics, you never see in smoke. You will never see in a gatherer a smoke coming back to the chimney. Whereas the equation of motion of every particle is symmetrical in time. And here you have a phenomenon of a different state, which seems to exhibit asymmetry of time. So whenever you look at things in different level of obstruction, you might encounter a conflict, a logical conflict. In our case the conflict is between the knowledge that the robot is just the finite state of being, and the other robot claims, I had an option. And here with that kind of screen, I have an option. I am going to go to the last slide. Here I have an option. Thank you, yes. Okay, you take questions offline now, let's take this speaker again.